# BINF 201 – Practical 2 – Quality Control

In this tutorial we will have a look at quality control of sequencing data. We will have a look at some commonly used QC tools, and apply them to different sequencing files.

## Software installation & data retrieval

In this tutorial we will have a look at the following software:

- [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/), a tool for QC of sequencing data
- [Fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp), a fast and all-in-one fastq preprocessor (QC + trimming)
- [Cutadapt](https://github.com/marcelm/cutadapt/), an basic fastq trimmer
- [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/), a software that integrates the output from the above toosl and create a handy report

### For students using NREC

The data and software has been setup on the NREC server. Before starting the practical, make sure to activate the correct environment as follows:

```
mamba activate QC
```
> This will activate the correct mamba environment, containing the necessary software for this tutorial

You can make a copy of the data you will be working on by running this command from your home directory:
> If your not sure if you are in the home folder, run `cd` or `cd ~` to go to your home directory.

```
mkdir -p Practical2
ln -s /home/brdan9637/Pract2_QC/Data/* Practical2
```
> `mkdir -p` creates a folder called Practical2. The "-p" options tells mkdir to create subdirectories if necessary, and to not give an error if the folder(s) already exist
> `ln -s` creates what we call a "symbolic link". This creates a small file that just says "Instead of this file, use the file that I'm liking to". This allows you to "copy" files without actually having to make a physical copy.

Now, go to the newly created directory (by running `cd Practical2`), and you are ready to start!

### For students running on their own pc

You will first have to setup the correct environment with the necessary tools. See [the intro practical](00_IntroSetup.md) on how to install mamba, and how to create an enviroment for downloading the necessary data.

To create a new environment including the necessary tools for this practical, run the following command:

```
mamba create -n QC fastqc fastp cutadapt multiqc
```
> This will create a new environment called "QC" with the necessary tools.

Create a new folder (e.g. `Practical2`), go into it (`cd Practical2`), and then download the necessary data, by either:

- Download directly from the [Zenodo repository]():

```
wget link_to_zenodo_file(s)
```

- Download manually using the commands below:

> Note: some of the files are quite large to download (>30Gb), so the downloads and processing might take some time (up to multiple hours), and make sure to have enough diskspace! Using the commands below will also subset the data, creating a total dataset of +- 2Gb.

<details>
<summary>Click here to expand the commands</summary>

```
prefetch SRR28682813
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR28682813/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR28682813.fastq 1000000 > Cele_SE_Illumina_WG.fastq
rm -r SRR28682813/ SRR28682813.fastq

prefetch SRR26045667
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR26045667/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR26045667.fastq 1000000 > Cele_SE_Illumina_ChIP.fastq
rm -r SRR26045667/ SRR26045667.fastq

prefetch SRR27482194
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR27482194/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR27482194_1.fastq 1000000 > Cele_PE_F_Illumina_WG.fastq
seqtk sample -s666 SRR27482194_2.fastq 1000000 > Cele_PE_R_Illumina_WG.fastq
rm -r SRR27482194/ SRR27482194*.fastq

prefetch SRR29241209
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR29241209/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR29241209.fastq 1000000 > Cele_SE_IonTorrent_WG.fastq
rm -r SRR29241209/ SRR29241209.fastq

prefetch SRR24201712
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR24201712/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR24201712.fastq 50000 > Cele_Nanopore_WG.fastq
rm -r SRR24201712/ SRR24201712.fastq

prefetch SRR22137522
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR22137522/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR22137522.fastq 10000 > Cele_PacBio_WG.fastq
rm -r SRR22137522/ SRR22137522.fastq

prefetch SRR13196478
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR13196478/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR13196478_1.fastq 1000000 > Cele_PE_F_Illumina_RNA.fastq
seqtk sample -s666 SRR13196478_2.fastq 1000000 > Cele_PE_R_Illumina_RNA.fastq
rm -r SRR13196478/ SRR13196478*.fastq

prefetch ERR2969996
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files ERR2969996/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 ERR2969996_1.fastq 1000000 > Dsan_PE_F_Illumina_WG.fastq
seqtk sample -s666 ERR2969996_2.fastq 1000000 > Dsan_PE_R_Illumina_WG.fastq
rm -r ERR2969996/ ERR2969996*.fastq

prefetch SRR12224794
fasterq-dump -p --outdir ./ --split-files SRR12224794/*sra
seqtk sample -s666 SRR12224794.fastq 10000 > Dsan_SE_Illumina_Herb.fastq
rm -r SRR12224794/ SRR12224794.fastq

pigz -p 4 *fastq
```

>The `prefetch` command downloads and validates the necessary data from SRA in the `.sra` format
The `fasterq-dump` command then converts the `.sra` file into `.fastq` files. The `-p` option makes the program display the progress bars, the `--outdir` parameter sets where the output files should be set, the `--split-files` option tells the software to split the files in case of paired reads.
The `seqtk` command lets us subsample a `.fastq` file. We picked the subsample option (`sample`), with a random seed of 666 `-s666`. The second number (e.g. `1000000`) sets to how many reads we need to sample (this can also be a decimal number in case you want to only keep a proportion of reads (e.g. set to `0.5` to keep half of the reads).
The `pigz` command compresses the reads so they take up less space on the disk. Many bioinformatic tools nowadays can work with compressed files, so it is often better to keep your reads compressed. The `-p 4` option tells pigz to use 4 cores for compression. Feel free to change this number if you have more or fewer cores available on your machine.
</details>


Once the data is downloaded, remember to (re-)activate the `QC` environment before going further with the practical.

## The data

The data is composed of different sequencing reads of _Caenorhabditis elegans_, a worm that is commonly used as model species, and from _Dioscorea sansibarensis_, a tropical plant species. For an overview of where the data comes from, see the [information sheet on Zenodo]().

## FastQC

We will start by running FastQC on the sequencing reads. FastQC will gather a lot of information and create graphs about the sequencing data. The resulting report can be used to check the quality of your sequencing reads, and if further pre-processing is necessary.

To run fastqc on a sample, run the following command:

```
fastqc Cele_SE_Illumina_WG.fastq
```

This will create 2 files: a `.fastq.html` file containing the fastqc report, and a `.zip` file containing the data used to create the plots in the html file. In general you can ignore the `.zip` file. 

Let's have a look at the FastQC report. Sadly, the terminal cannot visualise the a `.html` report. You will have to download the file to your local computer before you can look at it. How to do this depends on your situation:

 - If you are working on your own computer, you just need to locate the file on your filesystem, and open it with any `.html` viewer (for example an internet browser).
 - If you are working on NREC using MobaXTerm, you can try locating the file in the file browser on the left (globe icon). Navigate to the folder where your files are and either:
	- Right-click and pick "open with", and choose a `.html` viewer (for example an internet browser).
	- Right-click and pick "download" to download the file to your own computer, and then visualize it with a `.html` viewer.
 - If you are working on NREC using a normal terminal (you connected using the `ssh` command), you'll have to copy the file using the command line. You can use `scp`for this:
	- First, open a new terminal window, which is not connected to the server yet
	- Then copy the files using `scp` (replace the parts between curly brackets `{}` with what is applicable to you)[^1]:
	
	```
	scp {username}@{NREC server ip}:/home/{username}/{path to your file} {target directory}
	```
	> If you want to copy the file to the folder from where you connected, you can replace the target directory with `./`
	- Then locate the file on your own filesystem, and open it using a `.html` viewer (e.g. an internet browser)

[^1]: It can be that you have to add your private key for connecting. In this case use the following command: `scp -i {path to private key} {username}@{NREC server ip}:/home/{username}/{path to your file} {target directory}`

Once you have opened the report, have a look at the contents and try answering the following questions:

<details>
<summary>How many reads are in the dataset?</summary>

_1 million (1000000)_
</details>

<details>
<summary>How long are the reads in the dataset?</summary>

_50 bp (sequence length)_
</details>

<details>
<summary>What is the average %GC (= GC content) of this dataset?</summary>

_36% (%GC)_
</details>

<details>
<summary>If we would sequence a library containing only "A" bases, what would the %GC be?</summary>

_0%: The %GC is the proportion of G and C bases in a sequencing set. If we would only have A's, we would not have any Gs or Cs, and the %GC would be 0._
</details>


Consider the following dummy fastq sequence:

```
@ERR899422.1 HS002:1:C600UACXX:2:1101:2590:1987/1
GCTANTTA
+
BBBF#0BF
```

<details>
<summary>What do each 4 lines represent?</summary>

_From top to bottom:_

- _The identification line (name of the read, and possibly sequencing information)_
- _Nucleotide sequence of the read_
- `+` _icon for connecting lines 2 and 4_
- _ASCII-encoded Phred scores_

</details>

<details>
<summary>Why must the second and fourth line always have the same number of characters?</summary>

_Because every base must have an associated quality score, and the quality scores are all encoded as one ASCII character._
</details>

<details>
<summary>What does a quality score of "B" mean in the dummy sequence?</summary>

_Assuming Phred-33 encoding, a quality score of "B" corresponds to a phred-score of 33. This means the probability that this base is incorrect is_ $10^{-3.3}$ or $1/{10^{3.3}}$ or $5.01*10^{-4}$

_To know how to calculate this, see Lecture 2, or have a look [here](https://people.duke.edu/~ccc14/duke-hts-2018/bioinformatics/quality_scores.html)_
</details>

Go back to the FastQC report, and answer the following questions:

<details>
<summary>What is the average quality score of the majority of reads/sequences?</summary>

_37: this is the peak on the graph "Per sequence quality scores"_
</details>

<details>
<summary>Are all the reads the same length?</summary>

_Yes: You can see this in the "Sequence Length Distribution panel, which shows a peak at 50bp, and 0 for all other lengths._
</details>

We can see that FastQC notifies us about some errors (red crosses) and warnings (orange exclamation marks). Let's have a look at them.

<details>
<summary>What do you think is the problem in the "Per base sequence" panel?</summary>

_There are positions in the reads that have a low quality score (<20) both at the beginning and at the end of the reads._
</details>

<details>
<summary>What do you think is the problem in the "Per tile sequence quality" panel?</summary>

_We see distinct low-quality (green-yellow-red) bands specific to certain tiles of the flow cell. This means that there might have been problem with the flow cell and/or sequencing machine, as it seems that specific "tiles" of the flow cell only output low-quality reads._
</details>

<details>
<summary>What do you think is the problem in the "Per base N content" panel?</summary>

_There is a peak of Ns at the 50th base. It looks like every 50th base is an N. When looking back at the sequence quality per base, we also see that the last base has a very low quality (all have a quality score of 2). This likely means that the sequence has problems with determining the last base of the read, and thus puts an N everywhere._
</details>

<details>
<summary>The "Overrepresented sequences" panel throws a warning because it has found an overrepreseted sequence. Is this something to worry about?</summary>

_There is only one sequence, it is present in low percentage (0.1%), and it is identified as a sequencing adapter. This is nothing to worry about, and adapter trimming (see later) should be able to get rid of these._
</details>

Now that we had a look at our first report, let's generate FastQC reports for all `.fastq` files. We can run FastQC easily on all files using the following command:

```
fastqc *fastq.gz
```
> The `*` symbol is a shell wildcard, and in this case means "everything". This command is equivalent to running `fastqc file1.fastq.gz file2.fastq.gz file3.fastq.gz`.

Now have a quick look at all generated FastQC reports, and answer the questions below.

> If you are using `scp` to copy files to your local pc, you easily download the all `.html` files in one go using following command:
>```
>scp '{username}@{NREC server ip}:/home/{username}/{folder containg html files}/\*.html' {target directory}
>```
> Pay attention to the quotes around the first part of the command, and the backslash before the `*`!


<details>
<summary>Based on the observed quality scores, would you prefer Illumina or IonTorrent?</summary>

_Illumina has consistenlty high quality scores (>35), while the IonTorrent data has lower quality scores (between 20 and 30)._
</details>

<details>
<summary>In the Cele_SE_Illumina_ChIP file, there is a warning for the "Per sequence GC content". What is the problem, and why could we see this pattern, given that this data comes from a ChIP-seq experiment?</summary>

_There is a second GC peak around 48%GC. ChIP-seq data is enriched in sequences that act as binding sites for proteins (e.g. transcription factors). These binding sites often have specific motifs and often contain so-called CpG islands._
_The presence of these CpG islands increases the %GC of these regions, and since our data is enriched for these regions, we see an additional spike with higher %GC._
</details>

>(Hint: see [Practical 1](01_GenomeBrowsers.md) on genome browsers for more info about ChIP-seq)


<details>
<summary>In the RNA-seq data (files ending in "_RNA.fastq.gz") you can observe high levels of sequence duplication. Why would this be the case?</summary>

_RNA-seq only sequences mRNA transcripts instead of the whole genome. Some transcripts are really abundant and will thus create a lot of reads. Since the lenght of transcripts is relatively short (compared to a whole genome), it is very likely that you will create identical reads from the same transcript, leading to the observed levels of duplication._
</details>

<details>
<summary>In the PacBio HiFi read set, why are the quality scores so high?</summary>

_PacBio HiFi reads are generated from so-called CCS: Circular Consensus Sequencing (more info [here](https://www.pacb.com/technology/hifi-sequencing/)). This means that each read is generated by reading the same sequence multiple times. This lowers the chances of detecting the wrong base, thus increasing significantly the quality scores._
</details>

<details>
<summary>Between the two long-read technologies (PacBio & Nanpore), who generated the longest read?</summary>

_Nanopore: 58236 (see the upper bound of "Sequence length" in the basic statistics panel), whic is more than PacBio (42933)_
</details>

<details>
<summary>Why can't we see boxplots on the right sight of the "Per base sequence quality" graph in PacBio and Nanopore reads?</summary>

_The graph shows the quality over the position in the read. The right side of the graph represents the longest reads. However, there are fewer longer reads than shorter reads (see "Sequence length distribution")._
_Thus, are less reads which are >23000bp long, thus there is not enough data to make a boxplot for these positions in the read._
</details>

<details>
<summary>In the Dsan Paired-End samples (`Dsan_PE_F/R`), we see two nice peaks on the %GC graph. The sample is taken from a leaf of the plant, and all DNA is sequenced. What could these two peaks represent?</summary>

_Given that the two peaks are very smooth, we are likely dealing with two organisms, or two genomes. Since we have leaf tissue, it could be that one peak is the chloroplast, and the other is the plant genome._
_However, both plant genomes and chloroplast have very similar %GC (between 30-50%GC). A high %GC is often found in bacteria, which means that the large peak around 68%GC could be bacterial contamination._
_In this case, the "contaminant" is actually a symbiotic bacteria (a bacterium living inside the leaves of the plant). When sequencing the leaf, we thus get sequences from the plant (low %GC), and from the bacterium (high %GC)._
</details>

<details>
<summary>In the Dsan Illumina sample, look at the sequence lengths, and the adapter content graph. What could you conclude about the actual sequence length of this sample?</summary>

_The actual sequences of the this sample are very short (+- 50bp). The reads themselves are already quite short (80bp), and by looking at the adapter content it looks like most reads have a significant portion of sequencing adapter in the read._
_Based on the graph, we can see that 50% of the reads have an adapter sequence in the last 30bp (starting from 50bp), and 80% of reads have an adapter sequence in the last 10bp (starting from 70bp)._
_The explanation in this case is that the DNA is derived from a dried plant specimen from a herbarium. During preservation over long times, the DNA starts decaying and naturally falling apart into very short pieces._
</details>

For more information about FastQC, and some examples of "good" and "bad" reports, see their [webpage](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/).

## Adapter Trimming

In some of the samples we analyzed (mainly `Dsan_SE_Illumina_Herb` and in a lesser degree `Cele_PE_F/R_RNA`) there are adapter sequences present in the reads.
Since these adapters are artificial sequences we add to the fragments as part of the sequencing process, we don't want to keep these when analyzing the data (for example when assembling the genome).

We will be using [Cutadapt](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) here to remove adapters. To remove adapters, we need to provide the adapter sequence to the software. Which adapter sequence to use depends on the library prep.
You can find an overview of adapter sequences for trimming Illumina [here](https://support-docs.illumina.com/SHARE/AdapterSequences/Content/SHARE/FrontPages/AdapterSeq.htm).
In this case the TruSeq adapters have been used (see [here](https://support-docs.illumina.com/SHARE/AdapterSequences/Content/SHARE/AdapterSeq/TruSeq/CDIndexes.htm)).
The trimming sequences to use are `AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA` for read 1 (forward), and `AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT` for the reverse read (if applicable).

We will run cutadapt on the files that need trimming using the following commands:

```
cutadapt -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA -o Dsan_SE_trimmed.fastq Dsan_SE_Illumina_Herb.fastq.gz
cutadapt -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA -A AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT -o Cele_RNA_F_trim.fastq -p Cele_RNA_R_trim.fastq Cele_PE_F_Illumina_RNA.fastq.gz Cele_PE_R_Illumina_RNA.fastq.gz
```

>The `-a` and `-A` options tells the software the adapter sequence to use for the forward and reverse reads respectively.
>The `-o` and `-p` options specify the output files for the forward and reverse reads respectively.


Look at the information that the software printed to the screen

<details>
<summary>Which percentage of reads contained adapters in each file?</summary>

_Dsan_SE: 90.1%_
_Cele_PE: 5-5.5% in each file_
</details>

<details>
<summary>Roughly how many bases got removed when trimming the Dsan_SE sample?</summary>

_Roughly 27,5 million basepairs (from 80M to 52.6M), or rougly 35%_
</details>

Now rerun FastQC on the created files (`Dsan_SE_trimmed.fastq`, `Cele_RNA_F_trim.fastq`, and Cele_RNA_R_trim.fastq`), and open the reports.

<details>
<summary>Did the adapter trimming work?</summary>

_If you don't see any bumps in the "adapter content" graph anymore, then yes, it has worked._
</details>

<details>
<summary>What happened to the read lenghts in the trimmed files?</summary>

_The reads became shorter. Instead of all being the same size, some are now shorter because the adapter sequence has been cut away._
</details>

When looking at the sequence lengths in the "basic statistics", we now see that some reads have a length of 0. This can lead to errors in downstream analyses. 

<details>
<summary>Have a look at the [cutadapt documentation](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html). What option would you need to add if you want to only keep reads of a certain length?</summary>

_We should add `-m {min length}` to the command (e.g. `-m 30` to only keep reads >= 30bp)_
</details>

## Quality Trimming

Removing adapters is an important pre-processing step, to avoid contaminating your data with artifical sequences.
Another step in the pre-processing of sequencing data is quality trimming. As the name suggests, in ths process we remove low-quality bases from the reads, to lower the chanches of incorporating errors in our downstream analyses.
In Illumina sequecing, read quality generally drops near the end of the reads. This is because the different clones in a spot start getting out of sync during the sequencing process. This means that not all clones light up in the same colour, making it more difficult to see which base was incorporated.
You can see this nicely on the `Dsan_PE_R_Illumina_WG` report, or on the report [here](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/bad_sequence_fastqc.html).

In most of our sequencing files, the quality is quite high, and quality trimming might not be necessary. There are however some reads that could use trimming:

- `Cele_SE_Illumina_WG`: there is drop in quality (<30) at the start and end of the reads
- `Cele_SE_IonTorrent_WG`: the general quality is quite low (<30)
- `Dsan_PE_R_Illumina_WG`: the quality drops below 30 near the last bases
- `Cele_Nanopore_WG`: the overall quality is quite low (typical for Nanopore).

### Cutadapt

We will adress these issues by performing quality trimming using Cutadapt and [Fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp). We will start by using Cutadapt as a basic quality trimming tool.
Cutadapt can do very basic trimming, by removing bases based on a threshold. With the following commands we will trim all bases below Q30 (or Q20 for IonTorrent). Note: we will only trim the short reads here. 

```
cutadapt -q 30,30 -o Cele_SE_Illumina_trim.fastq Cele_SE_Illumina_WG.fastq.gz
cutadapt -q 20,20 -o Cele_SE_IonTorrent_trim.fastq Cele_SE_IonTorrent_WG.fastq.gz
cutadapt -q 30 -o Dsan_PE_F_trim.fastq -p Dsan_PE_R_trim.fastq Dsan_PE_F_Illumina_WG.fastq.gz Dsan_PE_R_Illumina_WG.fastq.gz
```

<details>
<summary>Have another look at the [Cutadapt manual](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html). What is the difference between `-q 30` and `-q 30,30`?</summary>

`-q 30` _will only trim the end of the reads (the 3' side). `-q 30,30` will trim both the 3' and 5' end._
</details>


<details>
<summary>Based on the output of the commands, in which file were the most bases removed?</summary>

_IonTorrent: +- 9.5M bases removed_
_SE Illumina: +- 7M bases removed_
_PE Dsan: +- 2.4M bases removed_
</details>

Try rerunning the trimming step on the IonTorrent data, but settting the quality cutoff to 30 instead of 20 for both ends. Remember to change the output name as well, so you don't override your original trimmed file!

<details>
<summary>How many bases remain after trimming? Would this be a problem?</summary>

_Roughly 250k bases (or +- 0.0015%). This would be a problem as almost all bases are removed, so likely not enough data is available for meaningfull analyses._
</details>

Now run FastQC on the newly created trimmed files, and have a look at the reports.

<details>
<summary>Are there still bases below the cutoff (Q20 or Q30) in the datasets?</summary>

_Yes: we can still see bases <Q20 in the IonTorrent set, and <Q30 in the Dsan set. This is because of two reasons:_

- _Trimming starts from the ends towards the middle. Thus, if you have one low-quality base surrounded by high quality bases in the middle of the read, read trimming will not remove it._
_This is actually a good thing, because removing bases in the middle of your read will make your read unusable._
- _The [trimming algorithm](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/algorithms.html#quality-trimming-algorithm) does not just remove all bases below a threshold._
_In cases where the quality fluctuates around the threshold, the place where it starts cutting might not be exactly where you want it to cut._

</details>

Similarly to what we had after adapter trimming, some reads are fully trimmed, yielding reads of 0 length. See the last question in the adapter trimming section on how to specify a length cutoff.

### Fastp

[Fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) is an another trimmer for short-read sequencing data. We will start by running it using the default settings on some of our files:

```
fastp -i Dsan_SE_Illumina_Herb.fastq.gz -o Dsan_Herb_fastp.fastq -h Dsan_Herb_fastp.html -j Dsan_Herb_fastp.json
fastp -i Cele_SE_IonTorrent_WG.fastq.gz -o Cele_IonT_fastp.fastq -h Dsan_Herb_fastp.html -j Cele_IonT_fastp.json
fastp -i Cele_SE_Illumina_WG.fastq.gz -o Cele_Illu_fastp.fastq -h Dsan_Herb_fastp.html -j Cele_Illu_fastp.json
```
> `-i` and `-o` set the input and output file respectively. `-h` and `-h` set the names of the output reports (in html and json format). Note that we do not have to specify the adapter sequence. Fastp has a build-in collection of adapter sequences, and tries to guess which one is applicable for the data at hand.

Fastp creates a report file with some basic statistics about the trimming. However, these reports are not as nice as the FastQC ones, so you can run FastQC again on the trimmed files, and look at the reports.

<details>
<summary>Did Fastp manage to detect and remove the adapters in the Dsan sample? Did it apply a length cutoff?</summary>

_It managed to remove the adapters (none detected by fastqc). The shortest read in the trimmed dataset is 15bp, so it did seem to have applied a cutoff._
</details>

<details>
<summary>Did the quality of the IonTorrent data improve? Why (not)?</summary>

_Not really, the quality graph is very similar to the untrimmed graph. This is because Fastp applies a quality cutoff of Q15 by default, which is quite low._
</details>

<details>
<summary>Compare the sequence lenght distribution of the IonTorrent data before and after filtering (with both fastp and cutadapt). What can be observed?</summary>

_The distribution after trimming with fastp is very similar to before trimming, while trimming with cutadapt alters the graph a lot more on the lower end._
_This is because fastp does not cut reads during quality trimming. If you take a look at the [filtering explenation](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp?tab=readme-ov-file#filtering) of the fastp documentation,_
_you can see that fastp does not remove bases, but removes reads if a certain proportion of bases is below the default threshold (40% of bases <Q15 by default)._
</details>

<details>
<summary>What options should you add to the fastp command to only keep reads >50 bp, and remove reads with a quality cutoff of Q30?</summary>

`-q 30` _for the quality cutoff,_ `-l 50` _for the length cutoff_
</details>

## MultiQC

[MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/) is a program that summarizes output from FastQC and other QC tools, and creates nice summary reports. 
It can automatically detect the reports in a certain folder so it suffices to run the following command to create a summary report (from the folder containing the QC output):
> In order to detect the outputs, MultiQC requires the `.zip` files of fastqc output, and both the `.html` and `.json` files of fastp.
> If these are no longer available, try rerunning their respective commands.

```
multiqc ./
```

This should detect the 3 FastP reports, and the FastQC outputs. Now have a look at the generated MultiQC report. Play around with some of the graphs and settings.

<details>
<summary>In some of the graphs (e.g. FastQC mean quality scores), it looks like there are only two samples plotted. Why would this be?</summary>

_Because it shows the position in the read on the x-axis. Since we have two long read samples, the short read samples are cramped at the beginning._
_It is thus advised to plot the short reads and long reads seperately._
</details>

## Long Read Trimming

Most trimming software has been developped for short reads. Since long reads are created in a different way than short reads, the QC is slightly different. 
Tools like cutadapt could be applied to long reads, but people mostly use specific trimming tools to preprocess their long reads

Since the field of long reads is relatively new, many tools exist. We will not look at these in detail in this practical, but here are listed some examples:

Nanopore: [Nanofilt](https://github.com/wdecoster/nanofilt), [Porechop](https://github.com/rrwick/Porechop), [Prowler](https://github.com/ProwlerForNanopore/ProwlerTrimmer), [Filtlong](https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong)

Pacbio: [Filtlong](https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong), [SequelTools](https://github.com/ISUgenomics/SequelTools), [HiFiAdapterFilt](https://github.com/sheinasim/HiFiAdapterFilt) (specific for HiFi reads)

